feat(article): new article on CSS order property (#203)
iodigital-com/io-technology: data/blog/css-order-rule.md

---
title: 'TIL: The CSS `order` Property Requires Each Grid/Flex Item to be `order`ed'
date: '2023-09-06'
tags: ['css']
summary: 'To use order on one element means using order on each of its siblings, too.'
authors: ['remy-parzinski']
theme: 'blue'
---

I was today years old when I learned something new about the CSS `order` property. I didn't learn about the existence of the property today, mind you. I just learned about a constriction which, in my opinion, makes it less usable. You see... when you want to `order` a `flex` or `grid` item, you have to `order` all of them. You can't just `order` one of them. Let me show you what I mean.

> According to its [formal definition on MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/order#formal_definition), its inital value is `0` (zero), meaning it does have a value. When you `order` an item, it will be visually ordered according to its value compared to its siblings's `order` value. Any item with the same `order` value will be visually ordered by its place in the DOM. Have a look at this example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
According to its [formal definition on MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/order#formal_definition), `order's` initial value is `0` (zero).
When you `order` an item, it will visually arrange itself compared to the `order` value of its siblings. When both these values are exactly the same, its place in the DOM will determine the arrangement. Have a look at this example:
```

```html
<style>
  .flex-container {
    display: flex;
  }
</style>

> <div class="flex-container">
>   <div class="flex-item">Item 1</div>
>   <div class="flex-item">Item 2</div>
>   <div class="flex-item" style="order: 1">Item 3</div>
> </div>

Reviewer: Easier to visualize the default values, by adding comments, so it shows the whole deal with the siblings.
Also leave out the `flex-item` class as it is not used and adds clutter for the inline css order:1 portion.
```suggestion
<div class="flex-container">
  <div>Item 1</div>. <!-- order: 0 // default -->
  <div>Item 2</div>. <!--  order: 0 // default -->
  <div style="order: 1">Item 3</div> <!-- order: 0, reassigned to 1 -->
</div>

<!-- Expected output -->
<div class="flex-container">
  <div>Item 1</div>
  <div style="order: 1">Item 3</div>
  <div>Item 2</div>
</div>
```

Author: Good one. I did apply a different result, though. The visual result is just plain text so I used that

```

> You would expect `Item 2` and `Item 3` to be vissually swapped. They are not, though. Both `Item 1` and `Item 2` have an implicit/default `order: 0`. Because `Item 3` has an `order: 1`, it is ordered after `Item 1` and `Item 2`. The `order` property is not additive. It is not relative. It is absolute. If you want to `order` one item, you have to `order` all of them. This is true for both `flex` and `grid`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You would expect `Item 2` and `Item 3` to be visually swapped. However they are not swapped, despite `Item 3` having `order: 1`. Sort of like zero-index Arrays, 1 comes after 0. If you want to actually `order` one item, you have to `order` all of them. This is true for both `flex` and `grid`.
```

Reviewer: With the comments in the code, the explaining paragraph can be smaller. The mention of additive, relative and absolute didn't make sense to me. Something like auto-indexing or zero-indexed arrays contribute to the case.

Author: Very good suggestion

> To order any element, you have to order all of them. This is not a big problem, as usually you wil generate lists of items with a loop (like `v-for` in Vue or `*ngFor` in Angular or `Array.prototype.map` in JSX). You can easily retrieve the current iteration index and use that for `order`. It's just weird to me that it is necessary. I would expect `order` to have a default value of `auto`, making the visual order default to the DOM order.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To order any element, you have to order all of them. This is not a big problem, as you usually generate lists of items with a loop (like `v-for` in Vue or `*ngFor` in Angular or `Array.prototype.map` in JSX). You can easily retrieve the current iteration index and use that for `order`. It's just weird to me that it is necessary. I would expect `order` to have a default value of `auto`, making the visual order default to the DOM order.
```
Regarding the default value of 'auto'; CSS is dumb, it goes after the HTML because it hardly sees any relationship with the selector's siblings apart from tables, odd/even styling and explicit sibling selectors and even then it is basic.

The fact you need to give everything an order, means it's supposed to be on a small scale and by doing so, you manually create the links that item 1, 2 and 3 are together.
